Last story because don't get as many opportunities
that we'd like to tell Palmer Lanco story.
Just by way of introduction,
I've been given very strong message to keep it short.
So I will just, the key themes that I'd like to leave you
with from, from my perspective, um, firstly is
around financial performance.
It is, it is numbers one, two, and three.
In our focus, we have to be, we have
to earn our right to do other things.
And, and that's based around operational excellence
and financial performance.
And we take that really seriously.
Uh, this year we delivered in a net operating profit
or last year, net operating profit of $49 million.
And our forecast for 2026 is between 80 and $90 million.
Um, we consider that a significant turnaround.
Not all of that is based around protein prices
and significant, the not a significant increase
between last year and this year.
But our operational performance underpins that.
Um, uh, our performance on farm livestock
and land management has been exemplary in our view.
Uh, we've done managed
to achieve emissions reductions, freshwater improvements.
We continue with that sort of license top rate stuff
that we think is really important work in the East coast,
try to deal and help with significant dislocation problems
with changing climate.
Uh, on the East Coast where we have a significant
investment, uh, we continue to invest in value
beyond pure profit.
Still play a role around, uh,
private sector leadership and innovation.
Um, but it's all predicated now on value accretion.
So we won't do anything for the sake
of doing the right thing,
but we do it where there's a, a net benefit to our p
and l, uh, we'll at least no cost to our p and l, uh,
and where there's a, a social benefit as well.
And that's a bit of a, uh, easing off of
where we would've been in previous years.
But, uh, we think that's the appropriate balance
between economic outputs and, uh,
and doing the right thing at the system level.
We have, um, some, um, interesting
and challenging conversations around, uh, ownership changes,
as you will have heard in the press.
Um, and we spend a lot of time
focusing on our long-term relationships with Iwi as a,
as a repository for the Crowns, uh,
treaty settlement program, uh,
in farm in farmland particularly.
Um, and we spend quite a bit of time
positioning our portfolio in, in respect of what we would do
for, for our farming systems if those farms went out
of our system and into, into alternative ownership.
Uh, but that's just one of the limitations
and realities of the portfolio that we have In terms
of the ownership position, the crown,
we tightly respect the crown has the right
to make a decision, uh,
around ownership or change of ownership.
Uh, our job is to give a best sense of what
that should look like, preserve the value that we believe
that farming brings to the farming system,
and we continue to prosecute that, um,
and make sure that we fully understand
what we might be giving away at the first instance if we,
uh, were not able, um, to retain this asset in the way.
It's, um, so thanks very much for that, this opportunity.
We look forward in the course of today to be able to
fill in any gaps that you might have.
Um, and, um, and,
and just in closing, really it is important that
across government, that the, the position of LandCorp
and the system, at least for me, is really well understood.
It's a critical piece of the system, which I think
we would miss if it was gone.
And so we need to fight to understand it at the very least.
And, and it's why committee such as this is so important.
Thank you, uh, Joe,
Thank you. Um,
I've got lots of questions today, but um,
before I do start with my, um, questions, I just want to,
um, make mention of the fact that I visit quite a few
of the, um, farms recently.
And I just wanna acknowledge the
amazing staff that you have.
They're always, um, really accommodating and, um, happy
and willing to share anything
and everything with me on those visits.
And I just want, I think, to acknowledge
that you've got a really great team out there.
Um, you kind of just touched on it a wee bit there,
but I'm interested to know, um, what it would mean
for the organization if Palm were to divest.
Um, okay, I'll answer it.
Um, in the best way I would can think of if,
if the farms are, the, the, the advantages
of having a portfolio at scale as we do
is reasonably unique.
There are pockets of scale around the country,
but a broad canvas of multi-functional,
multi-product farms across the country is something
that we probably take for granted in my estimation.
I think that the, the ability for the system to get access
to what works
and what doesn't work is, um,
is an opportunity we don't take advantage of particularly.
Um, on the flip side of that coin there is, we will have
to acknowledge there's a considerable amount of capital,
um, tied up in it.
So from where I sit, I've made it very clear that a ticket
to the game for us is financial performance
and operational excellence.
And without that, we do not earn the right
to do anything else.
And if we don't make it have a pass mark there,
then we shouldn't be part of the part of the portfolio.
If we earn that ticket to the game, then I think there's a,
a broader conversation that the country needs to have about
what role it might play in the future.
And that's particularly around Deglobalize environment
and all the things that are happening in this world,
which mean that economic sovereignty and food security
and all those things are things that we've never had
to consider in our other many years we've been, um,
in this fabulous venue.
So, so my job
and for the, the team will, will do this work is
to work out financial performance is necessary
but not sufficient to keep us in the portfolio.
And we're working on that second piece now. Thank you.
Thank you Steve.
Um, on another line, I suppose
a reflection I have on your statement about the financial
stuff is that LandCorp also
also uniquely brings an ability to get insight
to the challenges in particular farming regions
and farming systems and work on innovation in that space.
Most recently, we've had a very strong briefing on the
Madagascar rag war problem where
Palmer's insights were invaluable
to us understanding the problem.
I just want you to reflect on that's something
beyond simply financial performance that's, um,
the reliable authority within the active farming sector.
'cause you are farming who can help inform the government
of what's going on in different
systems in different regions.
How can you reflect on that, please? Industry good?
Yeah, look, I I think that, I mean,
my observation is New Zealand's very good at thinking about
the traditional orthodoxy until it's gone.
And then we say, I didn't realize we were, so,
we got such valuable insights here,
there, and, and everywhere.
So I think that's why I've, I've asked for room
to have a think about what it is that we might miss
by not having institution doing what it's doing with,
with commercial underpinned by commercial performance,
but augmented by industry good as, as Susie,
um, pointed out.
And, and then there's a whole lot of other stuff that comes
to that democratization of our data with 112 farms.
The experimentation, uh, with these bringing, uh, forestry
and horticultures potential additionality
to people's farming platform,
people can actually see whether that works or not
and why it might not work.
Um, this is getting started
to get a long way away from my pay grade
and I need to, we won and get the, the experts on it.
But that would be my, at a board level,
that that observation.
Can I just point out, mark, nice to see you
and I'm glad that you're not wearing your robe.
Bless you. I, no, thank you so much.
I'll have a few questions for you. Good gentlemen.
When, um, the chair is obliging,
Uh, we're all, we're all glad of
that. Um, can
I just finish off on sec 'cause I think it is an important
one that very much those areas
where it does play into our wheelhouse
where we have concerns, we'll absolutely step up into that.
'cause that's the Madagascar ragle one's a good example.
We are seeing it early on. There's examples
of activities we see up in the East Coast
and that, um, so where it plays into our funeral
absolutely will be keen to push forward on those.
'cause it's having a direct commercial impact on us as well.
Mm-hmm. So where we can support in that there's,
there's absolutely benefit for, for, for our part
of the business, but actually that's
benefiting the sector more broadly.
So yeah, we do spend that balance balancing conversation.
Mike, uh, thanks Jill.
I just had some questions around, um, economic performance.
Um, very, very, and,
and it's a good time to be a farmer at the moment.
Typically it's, um, it's great, uh, great prices, um,
but very difficult to, um,
to look at your financial performance in terms of,
and have comparison to the rest
of the farming sector on a like, for like basis
because it's very broad.
Um, do you have the data, for example,
do you compare a semi, uh, finishing farm?
Some are safe with a typical with other farms
that are the same in compare, not just, you know,
live weight per hectare, income per hectare,
and cost per hectare, cost per et cetera.
Have you got that at that detail?
Yeah, so every one
of our farms we have a PL and farm level.
Mm-hmm. And we can talk more to this,
but every, every month we go through farm level reviews.
Yep. Performance, um, rolled up to a regional.
And equally from a benchmarking perspective to
that point across a number of our regions,
we've got heavy influence in a number of farms in that area.
So very clearly we've got a clear view of what,
what's top performance for us
and where the opportunities are.
And then externally as well on an annual basis,
we then benchmark relative to whether it's dairy and Z
or beef and lamb or the different benchmarks we can get hold
of to compare how farms in a particular
segment compare to those.
And is that, I'd have a supplementary on that too, please.
Is that on a, on a, on a regional basis
and on the same similar land class
As much as you possibly can with
what data is available? I
Only like Baker at Baker
and Associates do a huge the fab analysis.
Yeah. And they're literally comparing like for like,
and if we do do that, where are you sitting in terms
of top 10%?
Top 20% bottom?
So we, we compare the Baker Ag ones if really go really
high level, um, dairy in the sort of lower
and north island Canterbury good.
Um, we've got our challenges in the central north
island off drought last year.
And those young soils are there,
but then across generically across the, um, livestock areas,
compare, compare very well. Yeah.
So we compare against beef
and lamb against all of the consistent, uh, ification of,
of farms, uh, within the regions.
And for last financial year,
our livestock farms were 2.9% return on asset
versus the industry of one.
So we can end on hard from our livestock farms so
that we are on par, if not better than the average.
Uh, when you look at our dairy farms,
we're sitting at 7.7% return on asset versus
10.3 for the industry.
So we do have some work to go there.
And that's return on assets,
it's taken into account land value as well as,
uh, economic performance.
And your sheet and beef stuff is like
for like within a region?
Yes. Yep. So Mark's got a, um,
Mr. Chair, if I could just
a supplementary on the back of that.
Um, and it is good to see you gentlemen.
I'm always grateful for your company.
Then let's extrapolate out
what a dollars per kilo actually looks like,
because I mean, most operational farms will know roughly,
and, and forgive me for saying
that we are all talking in generics here,
but what by the color gram, you must surely know
what your dairy farms are operating as an average milk,
solid dollars per milk solid,
and what you are operating at at dollars per kilo live
weight to the works for your red meat sector.
Surely Dave, you will have some numbers
that you can give the committee today.
Yeah, sure. So thanks Mark. We we do have those.
So for our conventional dairy farms, our cost
of production is $7 38 per kilo of milk solid.
And that was considerably affected this last financial year
due to the drought in Central North Island
where we've effectively got concentration risk with over 50%
of our milk production coming from that region
that impacted our farm working expenses
by 65 cents per kilogram of milk solid from the impact
of the additional supplementary feed that we had to buy in,
uh, for our livestock farms.
Uh, we've got a cost of production of $4 30 per kilogram.
Uh, and that's against last year the industry was was 4 41.
So, uh, we are sorry for last financial year.
The numbers aren't out yet from beef and lamb.
If you look at the previous financial year, we were 4 46
and the industry was 4 46.
So we're on par there.
In terms of production and, and projections.
O obviously, um, you're all cognizant of the fact that, um,
we have a pretty good production, uh, reality at the moment,
uh, in terms of income anyway.
Where do you see yourself in, you know, 12,
18 months based on, you know, are you paying down debt?
Because I think a a lot of the taxpayers would love
to see some of debt reduction in terms of risk exposure
that you may or may not have
based on the numbers you just offered.
Yeah. So, um, thanks Mark.
So the, the forecast update forecast, we've just
provided the 80 to $90 million knot
as we go through the year.
That, that is, is the conversation that
as an executive will be taking to the board when we get
to the final numbers, um,
noting the summer period to get through.
Um, and part of that conversation will be around our,
our debt position and our, um,
investment decisions we wanna make to continue to grow the,
the, the farming performance
and at the same time the, the ability to pay dividend that.
So that will be a conversation we'll take towards the end
of the year once we've got a, a good firmed up position of
how, how the season's finally played out.
Thank you. General, so
You've got a sub on that line?
Yeah. Just on your four 30 was that sheep beef farms?
Uh, 4 41 was, uh, industry and we were 4 61. So have
You got that broken down into sheep versus cattle?
Yes. Yep. You have. And what's that look like?
Uh, sorry I can't give you that detail right
now, but I can follow up with
That. Yep. And how, what's
the percentage
of your farm sheep versus being here to, you know,
um, the national average?
Yeah, so we've increased our cattle, uh, to 52%. 52%.
So that has been an increase over the last 12 to 18 months.
Mm-hmm. And that's been a deliberate move to, uh,
basically increase our stocking
rates relative to feed ground.
And that's on the back of better attention to detail
around pasture management, um, pushing feed forward
and different set, uh, system designs that we've done around
removing, say the bottom end of our lambs earlier,
pushing them onto finishing farms.
So keeping our heavier lambs up on, on the breeding country
and then taking animals through and,
and specifically dairy beef animals through
with a lighter footprint that we can get a higher number on
and get a better feed conversion efficiency.
Yes. So, sorry, just on that, so you're 4 30 41, um,
that 52% that wouldn't be typical across sheet
and beef per say across New Zealand, that percentage?
Would it, would you be higher cattle ratio?
I think the whole industry is starting to move that way.
Um, but I, yeah,
but again, I think we're around 50 50 if not 48, 52. Yeah.
Yeah, because I'd be quite interested if you could provide
those figures sheet versus, you know,
thing from Kettle and I think
Is that figure based on stock units or num animal numbers
Stock units, right? As
a percentage of total. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. And year on year for the last three years, Mike,
we've, we've grown finishing
or closing stock numbers by about 20,000 heads.
So that is, that has been in
that deliberate productivity game to Will's point
around unlocking that opportunity
with the, from the beef side of it.
Yep.
Yep. Mark, you've got a new question.
You Sure I have if I may. Um, thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, gentlemen, um, in terms of this leave no cup
behind policy and you are going into dairy, beef genetics,
uh, there's an aspiration, uh, I think you read 65%,
you're going to move towards 85%.
That's quite a capital investment that you have to make
to house animals through
to either weaning and then onsell them.
Or if you necessitate them all the way through, what sort
of additional investment have you made?
Do you think it's successful
and, um, you know, given the social license,
obviously this is something that you're keen on doing, uh,
in terms of an investment strategy.
Uh, what kind of money do you think that
that LandCorp is investing into that as a business model?
So if you, so for the last, for the season, we, well,
the spring we've just completed Mark, um, we will be up
to just over 72% of all calves read.
Right. Um, and that very much,
and if you look at, we've been doing a sort
of return on investment for our investment in those
calf area facilities.
They're coming back at a rough,
roughly a three year payback period.
Um, so to Will's point earlier, we are,
we are taking those opportunities, rearing those calves
through most of the, um,
additional capacity we've put on in the last two years
has been conversion of old wool sheds, um,
into car sharing facilities.
Mm. And utilizing those to then grow that, um, population
of calves through, um, hence the piece around earlier on
that we are then increasing slightly the, the percentage
of beef in our systems from a livestock perspective.
So, um, if you look at the end-to-end payback for us well
and tr well and truly paying for itself and,
and WIL can touch more on also from a working capital
perspective, um, those, those animals are flowing through.
We're not buying at the, at the wiener stores and
Things. No, no, of course, of course. Mark,
just very quickly,
if I could tease out though your logic though.
So you say there's a three year payback period,
so it'll be year four, you'd realize
that you've broken even anything
that post is profit, correct?
Well, that's, sorry. No, mark that's been really clear.
We treat each of the units
as their own individual p and l. So
Yes, dairy, The dairy farm's getting returned
for those calves, the, um, car fairing facility right
through to the livestock that is the car facility
by itself having a three year payback period. Right,
Right, right. Um,
It's, it's, it's a lot shorter than
that when you look at current beef prices.
Yeah. Very good. Thank you. Right, so we're
Moving on Joe.
I had a sub around this. Oh sorry, you had a sub. Okay.
Yeah, thank you. Um, I had a sup just around, uh, dairy,
beef, um, calves
and um, just interested, I guess,
'cause obviously there's an animal welfare, um,
benefit to, to doing so.
Is there, uh, what, in terms of the actual product,
does it make much difference in terms
of the product that's being sold?
If you've got that merging of dairy
and beef in terms of the, and how is that being marketed
and how is it being received by the market?
So I suppose that dairy, dairy be's always been part
of the sector for, for many, many years in terms
of those flow of dairy car out of it into the beef sector.
Um, hence the bit of work we've now doing with the, one
of the now called the synergize,
the breed we were doing with with LLC.
So that's now looking at commercializing those
through their commercial arms.
Um, those animals are very much targeted
to meet the needs across the whole supply chain.
So the calves meet the need of a dairy farmer in terms
of easily identifiable as afford as a carp when it's born.
Um, the short gestation, they low birth weight,
all the things the dairy farmer would want once
they hit a livestock system.
Um, their growth rates
and all of those things are comparable
to anything else in there.
Um, so hence once they hit a meat processor
that they're ticking the boxes from
that whole end to end supply chain.
So that's the attraction
of getting those genetics right, right.
The way through the process. It's meeting the needs of,
of everybody involved.
Joe. Oh yeah. Thank you.
Um, I want to talk about, um, your young farming equity
and she king, um, pilot that you have, uh, have underway.
Interested to get an update on how that is going.
Also interested to know if, um,
the current government setting, uh,
policy settings are support above that and
or if there is anything else that could be done to
make it easier or provide you more support.
Now you've had it sort of the pilot's underway now.
So is that including the apprentices
as well, Joe, or just the Yes.
And the apprentices. Yeah. Yeah, sorry.
So I think if, if you look at probably the easy one,
the easier ones first, the hybrid models we've done from a
dairy perspective, what's a well known model.
Yeah. Um, so the first four of those, um, are in the system
and, and, and going really well this year.
We're actually currently doing interviews
for the next four as we speak.
Mm-hmm. Um, two of those will be locked down imminently
'cause they are autumn carving herds.
And, um, the team are actually up, um,
east coast at the moment doing interviews
for the mahi livestock one.
Yeah. Uh, so that one's progressing well.
That's, that's probably got a little bit more learning
for all of us in it around what those systems look like,
the equity balance between all parties involved.
Um, so that's positive.
Uh, back to the apprentices, the first nine apprentices
of just completing, um, their first year.
So we will have a, a bit of a ceremony for them Friday this,
or Thursday this week, acknowledging them getting through,
they're all now heading off onto their, um,
full-time roles out on individual farms.
Mm-hmm. And on the Friday of this week, we'll um,
welcome the next 11, um,
who will come in to, to that system.
So we'll basically have that sort of full quota
that we can accommodate, um, regionally in that,
in that typo region.
Um, and the ability
to make sure we can support them once we're putting them out
into, into placements and things like that. So.
Okay. Is there any other additional support, um,
that you would require
or need to enable you to take on any more apprentices
and trainees than what you currently do already?
Um, it, it does get to that challenging point
that you do want 'em to have
to have meaningful work out on farms as well.
Yeah. To go beyond that region, we'd have
to look somewhere else in the, in the country.
Yeah. And then we'd have to look at the whole end to end
around placements, um, accommodation,
pastoral care and things like that. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Thank you Steve.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Um, complete subject change.
Um, I've had the absolute pleasure going
with my colleague Scott Wallace
of visiting Molesworth Station beginning of last week.
And thank you very much for having us there.
Which got to stay at the, uh, at the ho there, which was,
um, fantastic cottage, massive wilding pine problem.
Um, deeply concerning to see the extent of that.
We had a really strong briefing from both school
and, um, understood the
gravity of the problem and the need for
substantially more investment than,
than it's currently going in.
Mm-hmm. I know you guys are, the lease is coming
to an end on Molesworth.
Um, is it correct to understand that you won't be seeking
to continue leasing it?
Uh, with the lease part of it?
Um, we are awaiting, um,
the doc final expression of interest
and then we'll, we'll work through what that is.
So that's, that's sitting with Doc at the moment.
It's imminently due.
And then we'll work through that regardless.
We've got, we will absolutely make sure the right
thing is done with that property.
Um, but we need to see that expression
of interest in the terms and
conditions of that farming lease.
Um, 'cause equally we've got a large number
of stocks in there as well that we need to continue to,
to manage as we go through that process.
So the thing that struck me about it was
that you have this extraordinary landscape which has both a
biodiversity threat and a production threat from the Pines.
Would it be appropriate for the government to be
reinvesting any income from that land
directly into taking the wilding pine
problem? Good question.
Yeah. I think personal view is, I think, well,
and I think we need to think of the Whiting pile
one beyond Molesworth as well.
'cause yeah, it's, it's, it's across broader sector of that.
Um, and I think at, at the end of the day, that's a decision
for the, for the owner of this business, of how
that money gets reinvested.
Um, yes, the current livestock prices Molesworth is, is,
is is a profitable business,
but other years, um,
it's tighter when beef prices have been lower
and you're gonna get into a point there
where there may not be reinvestment
potential and things like that.
Whereas I think the wiring power control needs
a, a longer term program.
Yeah. More so take,
take it more broadly then across the other places.
You are dealing with wilding pines,
and I know you are across, uh, a number of your farms.
Is that something
that the government should be considering is a reinvestment
of any dividends or any income from those farms
back into taking that problem?
Because it's a ravenous, uh, weed species
and we face as much as 25%
of our land area have been lost in, in as short as 30 years,
which is, was devastating from both the production
and an ecological point of view.
Is this something the government should be
seriously considering?
Whether it's the di whether it's the dividend,
but I think we, we need a solution for wilding pines.
Whether the di dividend is aligned to that.
I think it's a, it's a more conversation for where,
whereas government investments made, um, will do our bit
to support that we can,
and we're taking some shout bouts out in below South Island
and likes where it makes sense to transition,
but it's, it's a bigger, bigger issue than just Palm
and, and our dividend
Final supplement. Yeah.
The final one is, um, a more minor one really,
but whether there's a place
for more sheep in Molesworth in terms of your observation
of, uh, it's currently almost entirely cattle in there.
Do you think there's a place for more sheep to assist for
that problem of managing the wirings?
It would take a, it would take a significant amount
of investment in fencing.
Yeah. And, uh,
there have been historical animal welfare issues
with sheep in there with snow events and mass death.
Yeah. So, uh, I think it would have to be a fairly brave,
um, and fairly targeted area
that you'd wanna focus a different stock class in there.
Mm-hmm. At the moment. Um, the ability to get, you know,
concentration of animals in there through the use
of wearables is an exciting opportunity moving forward
that would help getting an intensive grazing system,
a more intensive grazing system, which is also, um,
ecologically beneficial through the ability
to keep them out of sensitive areas.
Uh, but fundamentally, um, I think it'd be remiss of us not
to mention the branch Letham in a conversation around,
uh, welding pines.
If you're not gonna get the source stock, uh,
you're gonna be pushing something
uphill for quite a long time.
I was in the branch leham yesterday
and, uh, yeah, that's a terrible problem in there.
And you're absolutely right. It has to be dealt with system.
Yeah.
Mr. Chair for me. So, um, well, you got a sub,
You I've got a supplementary if I, yeah.
Okay. Thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, well gentlemen, that that, that we've teased out that,
what are you actually spending in msmith currently?
Either by the Hector
or as, as a, as a, as an annual sum
on wilding pine eradication?
You want a sub as well? I've got one.
Um, the, The, the majority
of the investment mark going in there is through,
through the, um, the bio, the wildings pine,
I can't remember the exact wording for it,
but the welding pines and control investments.
So that, that is the predominant piece.
Most of our investment over the last five, 10 years would,
we have done some small bits to support it,
but a lot of it's been in kind, in terms of supporting
with accommodation and people
and access and things like that.
The, the big investment is going in through the,
the crown investment through water kind control.
Okay. Okay. So you had a sub as well.
Um, just following on from what Steve was saying, like
with your experience in farming across the,
or too, do you see a, an inextricable link
between the decline in pastoral farming
and the increase in the sort of, of wilding ponds?
I think it'd be a long bow to draw a direct line,
but I think it has had a material impact in places
where it hasn't been attended to in a timely minute.
And, you know, often, you know, the back corners of,
of blocks that are sometimes forgotten all of a sudden,
you know, 10 years later can be overtaken
or not even that three years later.
So, uh, good management would, would, uh,
identify it earlier and then do something about it.
But on all honesty, to Steve's earlier point,
if it's gonna be growing at 30% a year, you're gonna have
to have a fairly aggressive, uh, chemical control, uh, bill
to try and manage that, which is expensive.
All grazing. All grazing.
That's what I'm saying. Yeah. So the,
I think we have seen, uh, non-intensive
or extensive grazing, uh,
it is definitely worse than intensive grazing areas.
Yes. Yeah.
Thank you. Rachel, you had a question?
I was going to just ask a bit more about, um, forestry,
which has sort of already kind
of merged into a little bit difficult, which is a good word.
Um, but just around, um, the transition across to, you know,
planting more natives and just, I guess how that's going
and where the challenges are
and if you've got enough support to actually
make those transitions.
So kind of, I know we've sort of covered some
of this already, but I guess just specifically on, you know,
how they transition into native forestry heading.
Yeah. So, and Andrew's welcome to answer part of this.
Try find where he is behind me.
Um, so yeah, over the, over the last, um, number of years,
it's probably circa a thousand to 1500 hectares of, um,
areas that have been retired into some level of forestry,
um, with, with a clear de a clear desire
that they will absolutely be harvested in the future.
Yeah. The mixture of that has probably changed slightly.
Um, historically
or now it's probably there's a 65 70%, um,
into, into Pine, pine us
and then there'll be a mix into natives
and then a mix into, um, cypresses and redwoods and,
and other mixed species.
Mm-hmm. Um, and that, that allows is from a management
and from a harvest management perspective as well in terms
of those catchment zones and things like that.
Uh, but equally a big part of that goes hand in hand
with that is in pest control.
So for those areas that we're retiring into natives
and things like that, we, we need to do that,
that pest control part of it as well to make sure they
Survive. I was, I was just gonna
ask about the biodiversity impact,
but are you able to track, I guess,
what you're seeing in terms of reduction in
pests improvements and,
and biodiversity both in terms of for but sorry,
but also species as well?
It's, it's an ongoing that the,
the pest control piece is an ongoing one.
Yeah. That will continue to track.
And, and it is one of those areas in terms of also for us,
those significant QE two areas as well.
Yes. Protecting those in terms of the opportunity
that comes from them in the future, from,
from value creation out of those as well.
And we do do EDA testing on, on rivers
and tributaries that over time we'll start
to build a better picture of the impact
of those better biodiversity environments
and the benefits to Yeah.
Have you got enough support to do that?
I mean, is there, I mean,
how long's a piece of string, right?
But, um, is it something where, you know,
more government support, more, you know, what do you need
to continue to kind of make, make this progress?
Because it's important, right?
Not just for selves, but also for, um,
for our biodiversity across, across the whole country.
I think, I think the, this is the area that,
and we are talking commercially with a number of parties
as well, and that's the areas around those,
whether it's called a biodiversity credit
or whatever it is, some sort of mechanism around that,
unlocking value out of those, those areas
that have been retired is something
that's gonna benefit ourselves.
But it's gonna benefit all farmers across the country
around those areas that, uh, may not be ETS carbon areas,
but create an opportunity to unlock value.
And part of that value is just then to look
after the biodiversity that's in there in terms
of pest control and weed control and fence maintenance
and all those activities that go around those areas
that, that have been retired. Yeah.
Mr. Chair, So Mark, you had a question?
New question, Mr. Chair, please. Yes. Yep.
Um, gentlemen, um, going back to the financials, if I can,
I, I don't wanna circle back to, to too much,
but if we could just sort of go through the capital value
increases that you've experienced,
and there will be some, I'm sure livestock values has
certainly gone up exponentially, um,
over the last 18 months.
Um, in terms of price hedging
and your program, um, in terms
of investment strategy moving forward, uh, for the security
and wellbeing of LandCorp or Palmview Farms.
Suffice it to say we are making quite a lot
of money at the moment, but we won't always be.
What are you investing in, uh, as an,
as a core strategy for your financial price hedging, um,
sort of program that you would,
I would imagine be operating?
So we have a, a milk pricing hedging policy.
So from that milk pricing piece, we've got a clear policy.
Um, but to your point mark, more around the,
the operational performance part of it, um, we, we continue
to invest in all, all the good factors you'd invest in
from a farming perspective.
They're getting the better genetics into our,
into our dairy herds.
Um, the same thing into our lives
that we genetics across the board, sort of conversation,
making sure we're regrassing pasture
species and things like that.
So all the basic areas will continue to invest in.
And then there's the piece probably around the edge of that
as well, around technology
and decision making that sits around that,
um, that supports that.
So whether that's the Farm X modeling, we do,
and I think there's a good example in the,
in the integrated report we're using that East coast region,
we're sort of modeling the whole region as a whole,
looking at how we optimize flows of animals,
but then the role that wearable devices
and the lights can play in terms
of lifting performance in those areas as well.
Uh, certain off from investments to, to, to, uh, give you,
I mean, we all look for investment opportunities
as farmers, you'd be no different.
So is Palm looking at off-farm investments as part
of its wider strategy given that, you know, we're in a bit
of a, a boon at the moment, but we won't always be
No. Our focus Mark
is very much focused on that,
the core on farm, on farm piece of it.
Okay. Very good. Thank you. Thank you. Mr.
I think Mark, just add a little bit more flavor to that.
From my perspective, um, you know, we build resilience
through having well grown young stock.
Doesn't matter if it's a dairy heifer
or Hoggard, uh, uh, a wiener deer or a, or a wiener cattle.
If we build genetics
and we build well grown animals into our systems,
we can drive productivity.
Uh, and then if we focus on our costs, um,
we can only manage those two things really.
So yes, uh, next generation of dams coming
through the business, uh, how we manage pasture,
how we manage costs, and how we ultimately, uh,
support our people through, uh,
focus on the right things is,
is critical to build resilience.
Very good. Thank you so much.
And Mark, just to, oh, sorry Sue,
could I just finish the conversation off the,
the other piece that, um, I think just, uh,
I'd like the committee just to, to recognize is
that we have a very static portfolio.
So unlike most farmers, we are not able to buy
or sell any of our land.
And what that means is that we are over
invested in breeding land
and we are short of finishing land, for example,
in our, in our sheep systems.
And we would desperately love to earn the right to get
to a point where we could
at no additional, no additional farm.
We don't want additional land,
but we do need to rebalance
to take some risk out of the system.
So it, it is, there is an element of us having one leg
slightly tied behind our back
and my conversations, um, with the ministers to get
to the point where we do the right to do that.
And I think that's really important.
Regardless of the sale process, our job is
to maximize the value of this platform.
And that's the, that's the last remaining piece really
that allows us to finish off our portfolio.
Then we can say we've got very,
very few other excuses we can bring to this committee.
Just FYI thank you. Thank you.
Um, Mike, thanks Chair.
Um, I just wanted to go back, I'm sorry,
jumping back a little bit, but when you were talking about,
um, um, yeah, your biodiversity type credit, you,
you talking voluntary carbon market
and if you could measure additionality
and things like that, that would be of benefit.
That would be our benefit. Yep. Yep.
Which leads me to my next thing in terms
of your whole carbon, I guess, strategy.
Um, what percentage have you got just interested in here
about, you know, what you've got in terms of liabilities,
what percentages in the, um, saw tooth system versus, um,
averaging because, you know,
they both carry different liabilities and has,
and just interested in how that's reflected And also, um,
what, how you, how you've actually valued it.
'cause it's been pretty volatile of late and um,
and then what you're looking out ahead in terms of where
that's going, just in sort of all that
Sort.
Yeah, You can touch on that, Andrew, come
And join us.
The knowing look across the shoulder.
Um, so with our, in terms of the percentage
of an averaging versus stock change, Michael have
to come back to you on the exact number.
Yep. But the way we look at that is
within our carbon policy, we wanna make sure
that we've got enough nzs to meet any future liability.
Mm-hmm. So those, those nzs may be earned in the years up
to the sort tooth liability Yep.
And a harvest liability that comes from it.
But we will ensure that no future management team
or board will have an n will have a cash liability
that will have an NZ U liability
and they'll have enough units held.
So that's quite a simple mathematical exercise to understand
what that liability is
because nothing further gets registered under
stock change. It's all under
Averaging. So you need to
increase your
reforestation to actually get those.
Um, no, we do not credits. You don't? No, because
Satisfied, correct. Because we've
got a number
in averaging at the moment as well.
Yep. And within, uh, the stock change method,
we'll always be earning units that
can meet further liabilities.
Yep. We do use our, uh, our units as well.
So we sell our units each year
to fund our forestry CapEx as well.
Yep. So any management that we have over the sort
of 10 years of establishment, we will use Nzs
to fund that as well.
Yep. Okay. And in your, how are they reflected value wise?
So every six months we mark our nzs to market. Mm-hmm.
So the closing market on whatever,
it's the last business day before 31 December mm-hmm.
That will get recognized within the balance sheet
and re value those units, that asset at that price.
Yep. And on 30 June as well, when we receive our nzs,
so we usually towards the end of Q1 or Q yep.
Two, uh, that will get marked to market on the day
that we receive the units.
Mm-hmm. And then
that will be recognized through our p and l.
So in your books here, um, the ones
that you've got on hand, obviously yes.
They are valued at the, at the
Duty June duty, June duty, June.
What's the value of those average?
Uh, I want to say 58, 25, 58, 25.
Yeah. About what are they now?
40, 40, 25 today, 40 25 on carbon match. Yep.
Yep. So that would be a, a decrease on the balance sheet.
Nothing through the p and l, that would be a decrease on our
balance sheet come 31 December when we, we've added those.
Yep. And of course, like all accounts,
they look at everything when they head
up your and liabilities.
So Sue, you've gotta sub on that.
Um, just a couple of quick ones.
So in terms of the, the liability, there's no liability
or no requirement for cash payments is,
but that would, it still depends on you replanting those
current plantations does it if they're, if they're
So slightly different with averaging in store tooth?
Yeah. So in averaging there is no liability
as long as you replant Yeah.
With the, so tooth sooo, you,
you actually claim carbon in your second rotation as well,
but there is a liability when you harvest.
Yeah. So you, yeah.
So we will have NZ views to cover that liability
and that's an absolute underpinning
of our carbon policy to make sure, sure.
There are units held that there won't be a,
a cash liability on that.
So there will be units held on balance sheet.
And do you have, um, any just, um,
non-production forestry?
Yes, we do. Yes. Some of that is, some of
that is in the ETS and some of it is not.
So when we retire native areas, when we say
that's actually a native area, it might be eligible
for the ETS, then we will, uh, register that in the ETS.
Um, other areas that are, would've been in forestry
for a while or other areas that have retired, yes,
we do have those as well.
If they're not in the ETS, those are exactly
what we were talking about before.
They're actually sequestering carbon.
We can demonstrate that they're sequestering carbon,
but it's a, it's more in the voluntary market.
So those become a, that's a different transaction of those
who are recognizing that sequestration
or that carbon sequestration.
How do we then sell that
or monetize that with an entity that's looking
to offset in the voluntary market?
So those are different transactions that,
So on me.
Yep. So, um, just in terms of your,
I think you said you've got some exotic
that's, um, permanent forest.
Correct?
Very, Very small. And is that single percenters, is
that typically on luck?
Seven and eight on very steep landscape?
It's, it's the back of the farm that we, we were, we need
to build 10 K to harvest it.
So really just keen to ask, you know, how do you,
how do you, um, because there's quite a,
quite a environmental risk in terms of, you know,
we've all heard that it's all gonna transition.
That's not gonna happen for decades and decades and decades.
Mm-hmm. So it's got a contingent liability in an event.
Mm-hmm. You know, 'cause gravity's not your friend.
Um, and, and so how, how do you manage that risk?
So some of it, the,
the decision not was generally 'cause uneconomic to harvest.
Yep. Um, depending on how that gets transitioned, that's
where we're currently working with our forestry teams.
And depending on where it is in the region,
whether there is actually a, do you actually cut that down?
Yeah. And not replan or harvest it,
but you're actually cutting, cutting in light wells
to let natives come through what we do for planting
around those areas and the likes.
So there's a number of different options depending on
where those stands might be. Yeah.
You've answered my next question. Thank you.
Yeah. Excellent. Steve's
As well. Yeah. Where
are those stands?
Because I mean, I know in the north island you get some very
interesting examples of a lot of native understory.
I think it's, But it's a quite
different scene in the south island.
I think describing them
as stands Steve might be a little bit.
Right. Often at shelter belts often these are sort of a, a,
a 0.8 of a hectare that's on the back of a farm
that was really just a a, a small plantation.
They're not, we wouldn't describe 'em as forestry stands.
They're just small plantation areas.
Yeah. Mike, I've got another supplement, right.
It's gone on a fire on, um, Rachel's one is that
I know you are focusing on cyclists
and macro carpets, redwoods mm-hmm.
Eucalyps, have you taken Douglas Feir completely outta the
mix because of plantation? Because it's such
A, the wilding risk is terrible.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. So that's, we're actually,
uh, harvesting them.
Yeah. Harvesting those, a lot of our shelter belts
and others down in the south island, there is actually areas
that we've decided to preemptively harvest in the Tiana
Basin wilding risk on those, on that Douglas fir.
But is it, is it not also a wilding risk for any
of those pine species to be in that seven
and eight land in parts of the south island?
'cause of the risk that they'll never be harvested?
There'll simply be a massive seed source
for future wildlife.
If, if we are planting in those areas, we are planting
for a commercial outcome.
So we will, we will do that analysis
before based on distance to port,
based on the sort of land class.
This is why that area in the town are basically
don't actually have a lot of commercial forestry.
It's just too far from port
and you just don't get the growth rates.
The survivability is not great. Yeah.
So we actually don't have a lot of plantation
down there of the
Rachel's next. Yes.
It's where you are doing the harvesting.
What are you doing with the land at that point?
Are you then doing replacement in terms of other, um,
you know, other, um, species?
Species Or are you returning it for pasture?
What's, what's happening in terms of the land use?
When, when we assess the suitability into forestry,
we look at three rotations.
We say this needs to be essentially a,
call it a permanent land use change.
It's not the right word when we're talking forestry,
but we are changing it from
pastoral production into forestry.
And that's over three rotations.
So when we do our first harvest, the expectation is
that we'll go back into productive forestry.
Right. So what type of productive forestry,
so you're harvesting Yes.
To reduce the wilding pine risk. And then what are you
We're harvesting for a timber outcome?
Right. So we get the revenue from the timber.
A lot of areas we were harvesting are
traditionally pinus, radi outers.
Yep. So we harvesting, we'll replant,
replant radiator within those areas.
What we have done though, with a lot of our plantings is,
for example, and a lot of the gullies
will be planting a lot of redwoods.
Mm-hmm. So those redwoods that grow slower,
those will actually be used and they will stay there.
They wouldn't be harvested at the same time we would harvest
the radiata, then we'd replant
and then we'd possibly harvest those redwoods in another 10
or 15 years out after that.
Often the cypress more at the top
of the hills are actually better for,
for wind bes and the likes.
You gotta suck Mark. Yes, I have sir if I can. Yep, yep.
Very good. Would you, well now that
that statement has been made kind, sir, could you tell us
what dollars per hec it would cost?
And you talked about three rotations. Uh, one question.
One, what is the rotation length?
I surmise it's 18, 18 to 25 years
for rotation one, two, us.
Is that, if it is re repatriated back into, um,
some pastoral farming reality, have you built that cost in
and what is the cost of, of, you know, uh,
regeneration as it were?
Because you surely, goodness,
you've done the, the numbers on that.
We have mark that generally what we look at,
and it's slightly different within the regions,
but uh, traditionally we look at a 28 year rotation
for radiata.
Um, when we put it in our model,
what we include is the harvest costs, the cost of replanting
and reestablishing that for three hectares
by the time we go out 80 odd years.
And putting that back into pasture, if you were to discount
that back back 80 years there,
there's very little value left at all. So
Yes, yes, of course.
Yes. I'm just thinking, I'm sorry if I may,
I'm just thinking of the counterfactual.
If it was left in pasture, if it was conducive over
that period of time, obvious, suffice it to say, um, you,
you, you might get 15, $1,200 return on, on your investment
per hectare per year,
but over 80 years it's quite a lot of money.
I'm just trying to tease out where you make the decision
to either leave in pasture
or go as Mike butter said, go into trees.
I mean, where, where is that, where is that line met?
That that's on a, on a present value?
When we look at, traditionally we're looking at an EBIT per
hectare, but we're looking at an EPV
and net present value over that period as well.
So remembering that a lot of this land where all
of this land that we're putting in is very much our class
six and seven land as well.
Yeah. Very bad. So that land, I think the critical part
as well is when we're identifying these areas, it's,
it's the forestry team, the farm team,
the environmental team,
the finance team all sitting down together
and having that discussion about
where the suitable areas are for forestry, how
that impacts on the farming system.
Um, if it was purely done on a financial basis,
there would be quite a bit more forestry.
The fact is we are looking at integrating forestry
into the farming operation
and not just doing large style
conversions on that as well, mark.
So if it was just sort of the,
call it the finance team sitting down,
you'd expect a slightly different result.
Some of those areas where we are planting, um, you know,
we wanna make sure that those areas aren't,
weren't good areas for, for laming in the winter months
or lambing in spring rather.
Um, and,
and paid a critical part of the system in terms of lane
what lane ways and infrastructure
and farm movements as well.
So there's a number of ways that we come
to the final decision on where that's planted.
Very good. Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, moving on. Sues you have a question?
Um, I just wanted to go back to the industry Good thing
because that's something I think
that deserves to be celebrated.
You've done an outstanding job.
And further to Joe's point about the, um,
field days, which are amazing.
Thanks very much Kara.
And the, um, and also in terms of health
and safety, the encouraging young people to, yeah.
To get into farming, the pest control,
the drench resistance, all of that sort of stuff.
And I just wondered if you wanted to add anything to that.
And then I had one other thing about talking about
diversifying slightly different,
but I might as well ask it all at once, was in terms of, um,
renewable energy and wind farms and solar,
Um, to Unpack there.
Well, I just wanted to get on in case
I missed someone, both them.
No, I think, I think you've captured a good number
of them, Susan, in terms of that.
Yeah. And from the genetics
and the dairy beef, um, the work with the wearables
and the holters and the likes around some of that on,
particularly in the beef systems, which is
where we see the big benefit really coming through.
Um, and I think as of was last Thursday we had the,
the hand, the opening day and things like that.
And that those conversations around disease res, um,
strength resistant and the likes and really good positive.
So, um, and that goes, that earlier conversation John said
that that is supporting our business,
but at the same time, if there's good
learning c to be had more broadly.
Absolutely. Um, the renewables conversation goes back to
where we see actually just part of
that is integrated farm systems
and integrating between used dairy
and livestock from a dairy beef perspective
or forestry, as Andrew said, into the right areas
that should go onto a, into a lifestyle property.
Um, at the moment up in,
which is out on the coast from there, um, there is, um,
wind, wind turbine lines going on on that farm as well.
So where it makes sense, um, in terms of partnering
with an energy company, um, we, we'll do
that from a integrating that into the system.
We've got the horticultural piece up in Northland
that Joe was up previous, uh, last week.
And so it's integrating into
where it makes sense into those different locations.
What's, what's, what's adding value to that on a daily basis
Basis. Thank you.
Just simple On that. Yeah.
Um, what about water storage?
Something we've talked about?
It's something we haven't progressed in terms of
where it fits, where it fits for us.
Um, we do be benefit in Northland in terms
of the relationship and to the Kerry, um, Kerry,
Kerry scheme, um, Kerry down scheme there.
So that's key part of that irrigation piece for there
to supporting the horticulture operation there. So
You haven't had a strategic look at, you know,
potential water storage around the country?
No. Okay. Right. Um, Joe,
Thank you.
Um, I want to touch on your reported, um,
net profit, which is a, a really good story that, um,
you've been able to tell.
Um, now, mark, you said, um, that Pmu was targeting
to increase milk
and red meat production while keeping spending
tight in an article.
What does spending as keeping spending tight mean in
practice for pmu?
And are you able to reduce the costs without compromising
animal welfare, environmental performance
and staff capability?
And then I'll quickly get my other question in too while
I've got, how do you balance the delivery of dividends
with the reinvestment required to sustain productivity
and resilience across your farms? Yeah.
Um, so on the first one, um, our, our absolute nongo,
we are not gonna compromise animal welfare.
We're not gonna compromise people safety on farm
and environmental elements of it as well.
So that is the challenge that we, we grapple with every day.
Um, can't remember, it was, it was a less than 1% price, um,
increase in costs we were planning for this year.
So looking fractionally above that at the moment
with foot fertilizer prices being slightly higher
than where we budgeted for.
Um, but our, our controls and that,
and it goes back to that earlier conversation,
doing those monthly reviews with our teams,
being really clear on those capital investments,
the up expenditure and things like that.
And Mike's question and are about benchmarking.
We've got 40 plus dairy farms
so we can get a reasonably good benchmark amongst themselves
around animal health and things like that.
So continued attention that, um, that is
what Will's team do every day in terms of
that pressure piece.
Um, the second one, oh, balance and dividends.
Reinvestment, reinvestment versus, um, um,
balance sheet and things like that.
Um, that is something we will, we will take through
with the board this, this year
because it is one that we are thinking through as, you know,
we don't, this, we don't carry insurance, so we self-insure.
Yeah. And we look back now
and look at Cyclone Gabrielle, which probably costs the end
of the day $15 million.
Um, I think we've seen in here the droughts
and the flooding down in Southland.
This one just gone but last spring
and things like that probably costs about $14 million in
terms of loss production, um,
extra feed and things like that.
So we need to build that resilience into
our balance sheet as well.
So between that, um, and the debt levels
and dividend expectations
and things like that, that is the, the, the clear piece
of work that'll be the next year as we go through with the,
the board in terms of that end of year position. Can
I just add to that, Joe?
And I think, look, one of the things that, that we
as a country have to sort out is what do we all do?
And you've gotta do it deliberately.
What we can't do is just flip around and this for one year
and that for the next year, and then can't do that.
It's an, it's a nature based system
that doesn't respond well to flip floop.
So, so I, I just encourage all of us to work out
whatever the, the, the, the platform is
and what, what the strategic rationale is
and get on with it until we change our minds at a,
at an ownership level to go and do something different.
Because on one hand, you, you're, we're expected to optimize
and to do a turnaround plan and improve profitability.
Mm-hmm. Um, and that's fine.
Uh, and then you have to, then you need to, in order to do
that, you, you, you need to do plantings of trees,
then you want, when we want dividends and then we want,
and then we, we we very difficult
to please everybody in this exercise.
That's right. And I think,
and I'm not complaining about the government's expectations
at all, but we can't turn around these, these ships quickly.
No. And so I think if we, if we can get some clarity
and have conviction about doing something
and going in some direction
for a reasonable period of time Yeah.
Given the capability that now sits on this organization,
which is entirely different to
what we've seen for many, many years.
And I'm p these guys, not me, the team are prodigious good.
And they've got this. And so we're in safe ground
around the performance of this business,
what we're lacking strategic rationale.
So yeah. Uh, just to extend an invitation to please any
of you who'd like to come and visit our farms.
The, the, the system, the farming system
that these guys are running now is totally different to
what you would've expected to see.
Um, and it is operates at scale and operates really well.
And we need to understand what we have
before we work out how, what we're gonna give up.
'cause your question is entirely right.
What do we, what do we, you know,
what do we really want to get out of all of this?
So please take that invitation.
Just let us know when you want to visit it.
I know there's, there's enthusiastic.
I have a question on the back of that.
Um, yeah. Is it a sub, is it Mark?
Yes sir. It is on that statement if I can. Mr. Chair. Yep.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. W well, John, on
that basis is a strategic, uh, rationale as you say.
I mean, we are all farming because we love farming
and we wanna see an opportunity.
So it's a, so the question for Wills and,
and Mark here, you know,
if you're talking about a dairy farm, so
we average three 30 across the board
and we, we aspire to be 400 kilo milk solid farms by date X.
Um, and we want appreciate, appreciated livestock gains
of sort of 1.75 to two kilos a day
for anything over 18 months through to 22 months.
Those are the kind of things I think
you're talking about, aren't you?
And, and you seem to maintain that, that,
that there are limitations to that.
Is it then a case of, of, you know, the portfolio is
so broad, so wide
and with different land classes across the board that
by its very nature in a nature based system
is where it's so difficult?
Yeah. That, that, that's exactly true.
But remember, we've got this not by,
this is not a deliberate portfolio
that anyone's put together.
We've, we've inherited this by t of accident lands
and survey and all that great rich history of New Zealand.
Mm. So whatever you might describe
that portfolio, we are optimizing it.
And that's a really good, that's a, none
of this has really cherry picked prime land.
What we've demonstrated is New Zealand's Inc's capability
to turn pro average land into quite
a high performing entity.
That should be an exemplar
for all farming systems in my view.
We, we, we are happy to democratize it.
We are not competition.
We don't compete with our local farmers.
I know visually it looks like that sometimes,
but actually that's not where our books are opened.
We've board has made it very clear we
democratize all our data.
Anyone farmer in New Zealand can get access to it.
And we think that's a role that should be tested at least
before we give up on it.
So, um, I, I think you are, you are,
you are, you, you are right.
But we've got what we've got. We can't sell anything.
We can't buy anything. Mm-hmm.
So an exercise of getting, making the most of
what you've got is what we've done pretty well, I think.
Well these guys have anyway. Mm-hmm.
Thank you for that, Steve.
Mine in a sense is make it quick an extension on that.
It's, uh, I, I would say that your place is one
of innovation, um, demonstrating new land use,
being something of an experimental space, as well as proving
what production or productivity gains can be achieved
through different methods and different land use.
Animal welfare is thing you just mentioned
before, um, an issue of, uh, significant concern
to the New Zealand public and,
and the international community.
I've seen in the past some terrible images of, uh,
the impact of winter grazing
and some of your Southland farms.
Um, I wonder if you can reflect on the past season
what animal welfare issues you had
and whether you have considered
what other land use there could be for those farms
that you currently haven't went
to Intensive winter grazing in Southland.
Look, I think, uh, every year you get thrown challenges,
um, be it climate, be it, um, you know, disease
or whatever it might be within farming systems.
So we are trying to build a resilient, uh,
system design within all of our farming systems
to make sure that we endure those.
And, you know, we invest in that, um, animal house spend 7%
above, uh, industry.
Um, which we've gotta work on.
'cause we've gotta find a balance there. We don't wanna gold
plate it, but, uh, most certainly, you know,
we wanna make sure that our,
our welfare rates are best in class
and we work hard on those every day as a team.
I think your question, uh, your second question around are,
we've got the right systems in the right places
at the moment, Steve, we've been
about normalizing the business.
So dealing with what we've got, getting the right to be able
to look at divers, diversifying it to different, uh,
land use classes or designs.
So we've been firmly going back to core basics, um,
employing the traditional, uh, uh, simplification
of systems focused on cropping
and all that sort of thing to be able to enable us
to leverage the spring grass curve,
which we haven't been able to do historically
because we haven't had the grazing capacity held on farm
through winter to take advantage of that.
So we've done that now, now it's about, okay, well
how do we keep continuing to challenge our system design
to make sure that we can continue the productivity,
but also manage our cost structure to be more enduring.
We've got a vast area of land
that doesn't prevent us from going into other things
like horticulture in different areas.
Yeah. But it's about what we can extend at scale
to make sure that we are still maintaining profitability
while not, um, you know, don't do anything too drastic.
I wouldn't say that we've got the answer yet.
We, we've, you know, two and a half years into a,
a five year turnaround effectively.
Yeah. And, uh, until we've normalized
and we've got absolute focus on
what our expectation is today to change,
it would be difficult, um, for our team more than anyone.
But that's not to say we shouldn't be looking at it
and aspiring to it.
And that's something that we need to work
behind the scenes on, you know, doing some modeling
and analysis on what that could look like. And
We've been pretty open, Steve, we've had self
and regional council using that example, NPI
and that over the winter periods coming on
assessing what we are doing.
'cause we wanted to absolute
confidence around that animal animal welfare.
But equally they've been bringing back other, other groups
to have a look at some of those practices
and things like that, that the
work the team are doing down there.
They're pretty proud around how they are managing across
that board number of environmental, animal welfare,
productivity drivers that we're all trying
to balance up down there.
And just to acknowledge it's not a
problem peculiar to you guys.
I mean, we're seeing issues with animals
and mud through cell phone.
That's a, it's a problem.
A broader issue than sort your, I mean,
Right. We've come to
time. So want to thank, um, the team from PMU
for their presentation and the, um, answers.
And I'm sure there'll be probably follow up questions from
the committee via the written, uh,
questions, uh, after this.
So thanks very much your time. Thank you. Thanks all.
Thanks guys. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Advice to help a lot.